---
layout: post
title: "Introducing Bitpacks"
date: 2026-05-06
categories: rtos programming
author: Nathaniel Wesley Filardo
---

<script src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/wavedrom@3.6.1/wavedrom.unpkg.min.js"></script>
<script>window.onload = function() { wavedrom.processAll(); };</script>

# Motivation

C and C++ are low-level languages,
especially well suited for working with hardware and in performance-sensitive data processing applications,
so it makes sense that they lack convenient, portable mechanism for working with bit-packed structures,
as often found in hardware memory-mapped I/O (MMIO) registers, network packets, and data serialization formats.
The primary, syntactic mechanism that these languages do offer for sub-word field management is called "bit-fields",
a provision to specify, in C++ jargon, the bit width of of a data member with integral or enumeration type.
Concretely, one writes something like

```c++
struct MyFields
{
	unsigned int enable : 1;
	enum MyEnum reference : 2;
	unsigned int bias : 8;
};
```

Unfortunately, the in-memory representation is almost completely unspecified by the language standards.
C++23 (well, N4928) says:

> Allocation of bit-fields within a class object is implementation defined.
> Alignment of bit-fields is implementation defined.
> Bit-fields are packed into some addressible allocation unit.
>
> [Note 1: Bit-fields straddle allocation units on some machines and not on others.
> Bit-fields are assigned right-to-left on some machines, left-to-right on others. -- end note]

While there is some provision for forcing alignments of, and controlling padding around, bit-fields,
the implementation-defined nature makes even this challenging to actually understand and use.

Moreover, bit fields are very much second class citizens:

* they may not have their address taken
  (so there are no pointers to bit-fields; what would be the type of such a thing?);

* references to bit-fields must be `const`
  (allowing implementations to quietly convert the reference to one of the bit-field's underlying type);

* because bit-fields exist within aggregate structures that are not themselves numeric types,
  converting between a bit-field aggregate and a numeric representation can be particularly troublesome,
  especially in `constexpr` contexts where `reinterpret_cast`-s are forbidden.

As a result, implementations in practice tend to eschew language bit-fields
in favor of explicit bit-wise operations on numerically-typed words.
They may even go so far as to eschew C/C++ aggregates completely and view entire MMIO regions
as simply arrays of `uint32_t`-s,
with information about the word and sub-word fields' layout
conveyed "out of band" via, for example, preprocessor `#define`-s.

Given the near ubiquity of dealing with bit-packed structures in embedded contexts, we wanted something better.
Thus, on an experimental basis, we have introduced
["bitpacks"](https://github.com/CHERIoT-Platform/cheriot-rtos/pull/558)
to the CHERIoT-RTOS programming framework.
Bitpacks are, at their core, simply machinery and syntax wrapping bitwise operators (shift, complement, AND, OR)
on an underlying value of integral type (say, `uint32_t`),
making it much more pleasant to view (and write code that views) that underlying value as containing sub-fields.

The remainder of this post gives examples of that machinery
(and of different ways of thinking about, naming, and typing sub-fields)
built around a simple, fictitious, but representative, MMIO device.

# A Simple, Fictitious MMIO Device

Imagine a simple peripheral that generates data and has some configuration knobs about how it does so,
something like a very rough sketch of an analog-to-digital converter.
Let's say that our device has

* a 32-bit control register with...

  * a control bit that enables or disables the device's operation,
    which must be disabled to configure the peripheral.
    The mnemonics for this field's values are `NoGo` and `Go`.

  * a status bit that indicates whether the device is enabled and active.
    The mnemonics for this field's values are `Off` and `Running`.

  * a choice of "reference", with one internal and two external sources, creatively named "A" and "B",
    giving us an enumeration with mnemonics `Internal`, `ExternalA`, and `ExternalB`.

  * an 8-bit "bias" value.
    This field is more numeric than an enumeration, so has no associated mnemonics.

* a 32-bit data register that can be read once the device is active.

Graphically, we might render that MMIO layout something like this:
<script type="WaveDrom">
{reg: [
  { name: 'Enable',    bits: 1 },
  { name: 'Active',    bits: 1 },
  {                    bits: 6 },
  { name: 'Reference', bits: 2 },
  {                    bits: 6 },
  { name: 'Bias',      bits: 8 },
  {                    bits: 8 },
  { name: 'Data',      bits: 32}
], config: {hspace: 900, lanes: 4, hflip: true}}
</script>

# Code Without Bitpacks

## An Array of `uint32_t` Is All You Need?

A minimal, easily generated software description of such a MMIO device might look like this:

```c++
#define MYDEVICE_OFFSET32_CONTROL 0

#define MYDEVICE_CONTROL_ENABLE_SHIFT 0
#define MYDEVICE_CONTROL_ENABLE_MASK 0x1
#define MYDEVICE_CONTROL_ENABLE_V_NOGO 0x0
#define MYDEVICE_CONTROL_ENABLE_V_GO 0x1

#define MYDEVICE_CONTROL_ACTIVE_SHIFT 1
#define MYDEVICE_CONTROL_ACTIVE_MASK 0x2
#define MYDEVICE_CONTROL_ACTIVE_V_OFF 0x0
#define MYDEVICE_CONTROL_ACTIVE_V_RUNNING 0x1

#define MYDEVICE_CONTROL_REFERENCE_SHIFT 8
#define MYDEVICE_CONTROL_REFERENCE_MASK 0x300
#define MYDEVICE_CONTROL_REFERENCE_V_INTERNAL 0x0
#define MYDEVICE_CONTROL_REFERENCE_V_EXTERNAL_A 0x1
#define MYDEVICE_CONTROL_REFERENCE_V_EXTERNAL_B 0x3

#define MYDEVICE_CONTROL_BIAS_SHIFT 16
#define MYDEVICE_CONTROL_BIAS_MASK 0xFF0000

#define MYDEVICE_OFFSET32_DATA 1
```

This gives

* each register's offset, in terms of 32 bit words,

* the shift to reach the least significant bit of each field,

* the (shifted, in-situ) mask of each field, and

* an enumeration of values for enumeration-typed fields.

An example function using such a definition to write code to configure the device,
wait for it to become active,
and then returning the first word of data could look like this,
taking a pointer to the device's MMIO region's base:

```c++
uint32_t test(volatile uint32_t *device)
{
	// set device.control's enable field to NOGO
	device[MYDEVICE_OFFSET32_CONTROL] =
	  (device[MYDEVICE_OFFSET32_CONTROL] & ~MYDEVICE_CONTROL_ENABLE_MASK) |
	  (MYDEVICE_CONTROL_ENABLE_V_NOGO << MYDEVICE_CONTROL_ENABLE_SHIFT);

	/*
	 * Set device.control's reference field to EXTERNAL_A value and set bias to
	 * 0x7f at the same time.  Leave the enable field unchanged.
	 */
	device[MYDEVICE_OFFSET32_CONTROL] =
	  (device[MYDEVICE_OFFSET32_CONTROL] &
	   ~(MYDEVICE_CONTROL_REFERENCE_MASK | MYDEVICE_CONTROL_BIAS_MASK)) |
	  (MYDEVICE_CONTROL_REFERENCE_V_EXTERNAL_A
	   << MYDEVICE_CONTROL_REFERENCE_SHIFT) |
	  (0x7f << MYDEVICE_CONTROL_BIAS_SHIFT);

	// set device.control's enable field to GO
	device[MYDEVICE_OFFSET32_CONTROL] =
	  (device[MYDEVICE_OFFSET32_CONTROL] & ~MYDEVICE_CONTROL_ENABLE_MASK) |
	  (MYDEVICE_CONTROL_ENABLE_V_GO << MYDEVICE_CONTROL_ENABLE_SHIFT);

	// wait for device.control's active field to be RUNNING
	while ((device[MYDEVICE_OFFSET32_CONTROL] & MYDEVICE_CONTROL_ACTIVE_MASK) !=
	       (MYDEVICE_CONTROL_ACTIVE_V_RUNNING << MYDEVICE_CONTROL_ACTIVE_SHIFT))
	{
		yield();
	}

	return device[MYDEVICE_OFFSET32_DATA];
}
```

## How About a `struct` of `uint32_t`-s?

We can use C++ aggregates to at least make the "outer" layer of the MMIO structure,
the layout and naming of the registers (but not their fields).
Keeping the per-field parts of the above definition,
but replacing the register layout information with slightly more idiomatic C++
makes our example look something like this:

```c++
struct RawDevice
{
	uint32_t control;

	uint32_t data;
};

// MYDEVICE_CONTROL_... as above

uint32_t test(volatile RawDevice &device)
{
	// set device.control's enable field to NOGO
	device.control =
	  (device.control & ~MYDEVICE_CONTROL_ENABLE_MASK) |
	  (MYDEVICE_CONTROL_ENABLE_V_NOGO << MYDEVICE_CONTROL_ENABLE_SHIFT);

	/*
	 * Set device.control's enable field to GO at the same time set the
	 * reference field to EXTERNAL_A value.
	 */
	device.control = (device.control & ~(MYDEVICE_CONTROL_REFERENCE_MASK |
	                                     MYDEVICE_CONTROL_BIAS_MASK)) |
	                 (MYDEVICE_CONTROL_REFERENCE_V_EXTERNAL_A
	                  << MYDEVICE_CONTROL_REFERENCE_SHIFT) |
	                 (0x7f << MYDEVICE_CONTROL_BIAS_SHIFT);

	// set device.control's enable field to GO
	device.control =
	  (device.control & ~MYDEVICE_CONTROL_ENABLE_MASK) |
	  (MYDEVICE_CONTROL_ENABLE_V_GO << MYDEVICE_CONTROL_ENABLE_SHIFT);

	// wait for device.control's active field to be RUNNING
	while ((device.control & MYDEVICE_CONTROL_ACTIVE_MASK) !=
	       (MYDEVICE_CONTROL_ACTIVE_V_RUNNING << MYDEVICE_CONTROL_ACTIVE_SHIFT))
	{
		yield();
	}

	return device.data;
}
```
This compiles to the same code as the `test(volatile uint32_t *)` implementation above.

## C++ Bitfields?

We can try to write our example with C++ bitfields, despite their implementation-defined nature
(perhaps we believe that there is and will only ever be exactly one C++ compiler for our machine).
That would make the MMIO region definition look something like this:

```c++
struct BFDevice
{
	struct Control
	{
		bool enabled : 1;

		bool active : 1;

		uint32_t : 6; // padding

		uint8_t reference : 2;

		uint32_t : 6; // padding

		uint32_t bias : 8;

		uint32_t : 8; // padding
	} control;

	uint32_t data;
};

static_assert(sizeof(BFDevice::Control) == 4);
```

And in use, we'd run into the fact that C++ does not implicitly define copy operators
suitable for use with `volatile` bitfield aggregates,
so we'd resort to doing more writes than the above examples, with

```c++
uint32_t test(volatile BFDevice &device)
{
	device.control.enabled = false;

	// challenging to make these into one MMIO write, like we could above
	device.control.reference = MYDEVICE_CONTROL_REFERENCE_V_EXTERNAL_A;
	device.control.bias      = 0x7f;

	device.control.enabled = true;

	while (!device.control.active)
	{
		yield();
	}

	return device.data;
}
```

All the challenges aside, that sure looks like nicer code!
So, how do bitpacks help?

# Introducing Bitpacks

Bitpacks offer a way to define, view, and manipulate typed fields within a numeric word.
Internally, fields are simply contiguous spans of bits within that word,
and operations are phrased in terms of bitwise operations (shift, complement, AND, OR).
Fields are accessed through "proxies",
each of which can be thought of as a reference to a field within a particular word.

One defines a bitpack by defining a `class` (or `struct`) that inherits
from the `Bitpack<typename Storage>` class template.
The `Storage` template parameter defines the size (and type) of the underlying numeric word.

Defining a field -- specifying its position within the word -- amounts to filling out a `FieldInfo` structure:

```c++
struct FieldInfo
{
	/// Minimum 0-indexed bit position occupied by this field
	size_t minIndex;

	/// Maximum 0-indexed bit position occupied by this field
	size_t maxIndex;

	/// Should proxies of this field not provide affordances for mutation?
	bool isConst = false;
};
```

A `FieldInfo {3, 7}`, for example, specifies a field spanning bits 3 through 7 of a word.
From this, bitpacks can, internally, compute things like the `_SHIFT` and `_MASK` values used above.
We will almost never encounter `FieldInfo`-s by name, but we will specify initializers for them when defining fields.

The simplest way to build a proxy of a field, so that we can access it,
is to define a method within our bitpack that invokes
the `protected` `Bitpack::member<FieldType, FieldInfo>` method with appropriate arguments.
This is called a "named member" and the C++ syntax involved
is encapsulated within the `BITPACK_MEMBER_ADD` macro,
to which we now direct our attention.

## Named Members

We can define a bitpack for our device's control register,
and specify a named member for each field within, thus:

```c++
struct NuDevice
{
	struct Control : Bitpack<uint32_t>
	{
		BITPACK_USUAL_PREFIX;

		BITPACK_MEMBER_ADD(enable, bool, 0, 0); // NoGo is false / Go is true

		BITPACK_MEMBER_ADD(active, bool, 1, 1, true); // Off / Running

		BITPACK_MEMBER_ADD(reference,
		                   uint8_t,
		                   8,
		                   9); // values from MYDEVICE_CONTROL_REFERENCE_V_...

		BITPACK_MEMBER_ADD(bias, uint8_t, 16, 23);
	} control;

	uint32_t data;
};
```

As discussed, `struct Control` now inherits from `Bitpack<uint32_t>`.
The `BITPACK_USUAL_PREFIX` macro hides some syntactic chatter that's often useful
(including, notably, constructors and assignment operators).

Our fields are now specified by invocations of the `BITPACK_MEMBER_ADD(n, T, ...)` macro.
These invocations define methods named by `n`,
each returning a `T`-based field proxy for the field whose `FieldInfo` follows.

Field proxies offer a number of methods on the field they reference:

* Getting the current value of the field.
  Proxies implicitly convert to their field's type, so this is often syntactically "free",
  but it is also explicitly available as the proxy's `.raw()` method.
  In implementation, this is the expected shift and a mask to extract the field's value.

* Setting the field value.
  Proxies overload the assignment operator (`=`) to update the field's bits appropriately.
  All other bits in the underlying word are not altered.
  In implementation, this is the expected sequence of shift, complement, AND, and OR operations (as we've seen above).
  This is not provided by proxies of fields whose `FieldInfo::isConst` flag is `true`.

* Read-modify-write functionality.
  Proxies provide a `.alter(f)` method which invokes the callback `f` with the field's current value
  and updates the field's value with the callback's return value.

* Cloning with override.
  Proxies provide a `.with()` method that behaves much like `.alter()`
  except that it returns a modified _copy_ of the word.
  `.with()` can also be given a new value directly, rather than a callback.

* Comparison.
  Proxies overload the `<=>` operator,
  and can be compared to other proxies (of compatible types) or values of the field's type.

Continuing our example, the code that uses this bitpack-flavored definition looks like...

```c++
uint32_t test(volatile NuDevice &device)
{
	device.control.enable() = false;

	device.control.alter([](auto c) {
		c.reference() = MYDEVICE_CONTROL_REFERENCE_V_EXTERNAL_A;
		c.bias()      = 0x7f;
		return c;
	});

	device.control.enable() = true;

	while (!device.control.read().active())
	{
		yield();
	}

	return device.data;
}
```
This compiles to the same code as the `test(volatile RawDevice &)` implementation above.

Proxy assignments and `.alter()` methods are defined for `volatile` bitpack references
(such as `device.control` in this example, because the containing `NuDevice` is `volatile`),
and each such performs a read-modify-write operation on the underlying word.
Proxy are more picky about field _getter_ operations,
and will refuse to operate on `volatile` bitpack references;
the bitpack itself offers a `.read()` method
that returns a non-`volatile` _snapshot_ of the (`volatile`) bitpack.
This serves to keep accesses explicit in the source
and allows for clearly differentiating multiple tests of a single read snapshot
from many tests each performing its own read of field value(s).

## Named Members with Custom Global Types

Much of the bitpack machinery is an attempt to encourage the use of fields with _custom types_.
For example, we might give a name to the "reference" enumeration for our device, thus:

```c++
enum class MyDeviceControlReference : uint8_t
{
	Internal  = 0,
	ExternalA = 1,
	ExternalB = 3,
};
```

We can take advantage of this type by changing the `reference` member in our bitpack:
```c++
struct NeDevice
{
	struct Control : Bitpack<uint32_t>
	{
		BITPACK_USUAL_PREFIX;

		BITPACK_MEMBER_ADD(enable, bool, 0, 0); // NoGo is false / Go is true

		BITPACK_MEMBER_ADD(active, bool, 1, 1, true); // Off / Running

		BITPACK_MEMBER_ADD(reference, MyDeviceControlReference, 8, 9);

		BITPACK_MEMBER_ADD(bias, uint8_t, 16, 23);
	} control;

	uint32_t data;
};
```

The corresponding use code changes very little,
but introduces our first _use-side_ bitpack macro, `BITPACK_OPERATE_QUALIFY`:
```c++
uint32_t test(volatile NeDevice &device)
{
	device.control.enable() = false;

	device.control.alter([](auto c) {
		BITPACK_OPERATE_QUALIFY(c.reference(), =, ExternalA);
		c.bias() = 0x7f;
		return c;
	});

	device.control.enable() = true;

	// .read() makes read of volatile word clear in source
	while (!device.control.read().active())
	{
		yield();
	}

	return device.data;
}
```
Again, this compiles to the same code as the `test(volatile NuDevice &)` implementation above.

That `BITPACK_OPERATE_QUALIFY` macro invocation lets us avoid the need to manually qualify the `ExternalA` name;
C++ name resolution rules would require that we write
```c++
c.reference() = MyDeviceControlReference::ExternalA;
```
The macro invocation takes advantage of the ability to look at the field's type at compile time.
It expands, essentially, to
```c++
c.reference() = (decltype(c.reference())::Field::Type)::ExternalA;
```
which is to say
```c++
c.reference() = MyDeviceControlReference::ExternalA;
```

## Named Members with Custom Local Types

The same `test` code (other than the type of the parameter) also works
(and compiles to the same code)
when we move the reference field's enumeration type into the `Control` structure itself:

```c++
struct NaDevice
{
	struct Control : Bitpack<uint32_t>
	{
		BITPACK_USUAL_PREFIX;

		BITPACK_MEMBER_ADD(enable, bool, 0, 0); // NoGo is false / Go is true

		BITPACK_MEMBER_ADD(active, bool, 1, 1, true); // Off / Running

		enum class Reference : uint8_t
		{
			Internal  = 0,
			ExternalA = 1,
			ExternalB = 3,
		};
		BITPACK_MEMBER_ADD(reference, Reference, 8, 9);

		BITPACK_MEMBER_ADD(bias, uint8_t, 16, 23);
	} control;

	uint32_t data;
};
```

With that definition, the `BITPACK_OPERATE_QUALIFY(c.reference(), =, ExternalA)` macro invocation
in our `test` method still expands to
```c++
c.reference() = (decltype(c.reference())::Field::Type)::ExternalA;
```
but that now means
```c++
c.reference() = MyDevice::Control::Reference::ExternalA;
```

We strongly encourage the use of such local types,
as it uses the device and register structures as namespaces,
minimizing the amount of stuff at global scope and making the purpose of a type clearer.

## Local Types as Member Names

In fact, fields can often be thought of as being _named by their type_:
_this device's_ enable flag is of a different type from _that device's_,
even though they're both active-high single-bit fields,
and similarly for the other fields.
It would be strange, after all, to read configuration values from one device and write them directly to another;
we can ask the C++ type system to help ensure that we don't accidentally do so.

Towards this end, bitpacks include a fair bit of machinery for introducing a custom type for a particular field
and then using that type _as the name_ of that field.
To make use of this machinery, we first replace (or augment) the `BITPACK_MEMBER_ADD` macros above
with `BITPACK_MEMBER_ADD_*` macros,
which simultaneously introduce a new type and associate field information with it.

```c++
struct TyDevice
{
	struct Control : Bitpack<uint32_t>
	{
		BITPACK_USUAL_PREFIX;

		BITPACK_MEMBER_ADD_ENUM_BOOL(Enable, NoGo, Go, 0);

		BITPACK_MEMBER_ADD_ENUM_BOOL(Active, Off, Running, 1, true);

		BITPACK_MEMBER_ADD_ENUM(Reference, uint8_t, 8, 9) {
			Internal  = 0,
			ExternalA = 1,
			ExternalB = 3,
		};

		BITPACK_MEMBER_ADD_NUMERIC(Bias, uint8_t, 16, 23);
	} control;

	uint32_t data;
};
```

`BITPACK_MEMBER_ADD_ENUM(T, B, ...)` defines an `enum class T` with base type `B`;
the definition of the enumeration follows the macro.
`BITPACK_MEMBER_ADD_ENUM_BOOL(T, VF, VT, bit, ...)` is a wrapper thereof,
defining an `enum class T : bool` with the enumerator `VF` having value `false` and `VT` `true`;
because booleans occupy exactly one bit,
it is not necessary to specify both the minimum and maximum bit positions.
`BITPACK_MEMBER_ADD_NUMERIC(T, B, ...)` defines a class `T` which inherits from a `Numeric<B>` base,
an internal helper class that provides, for example, implicit conversions to and from `B`.

Rather than having named methods for each field of our bitpack,
we now make use of a singular method template, `.member<T>()`,
which returns a proxy of _the_ field whose type is `T`.
Because the types are defined within a bitpack type itself,
they often need qualification:

* The `BITPACK_MEMBER_DECLTYPE(b, T)` macro gets the proxy of the field whose type is
  `T` qualified by the type of the bitpack value `b`.
  (That is, it expands to `(b).template member<decltype(b)::T>()`.)

* If the type of the bitpack value `b` is "dependent" (in the C++ sense),
  use the `BITPACK_MEMBER_DEPENDENT(b, T)` macro,
  which differs only in that it calls for dependent resolution of the type named `T`.
  (That is, it expands to `(b).template member<typename decltype(b)::T>()`.)

We can make use of macros that combine these and the `OPERATE_QUALIFY` form we've seen above
when writing code that uses these type-centric bitpack definitions:

```c++
uint32_t test(volatile TyDevice &device)
{
	BITPACK_OPERATE_QUALIFY_DECLTYPE(device.control, Enable, =, NoGo);

	device.control.alter([](auto c) {
		BITPACK_OPERATE_QUALIFY_DEPENDENT(c, Reference, =, ExternalA);
		BITPACK_MEMBER_DEPENDENT(c, Bias) = 0x7f;
		return c;
	});

	BITPACK_OPERATE_QUALIFY_DECLTYPE(device.control, Enable, =, Go);

	while (BITPACK_OPERATE_QUALIFY_DECLTYPE(
	  device.control.read(), Active, !=, Running))
	{
		yield();
	}

	return device.data;
}
```
This too compiles to the same code as the `test(volatile NuDevice &)` implementation above.

`BITPACK_OPERATE_QUALIFY_DECLTYPE(b, T, op, v)` is just
`BITPACK_OPERATE_QUALIFY(BITPACK_MEMBER_DECLTYPE(b, T), op, v)`.
Here, rather than using a method like `.reference()` to obtain a field proxy by name
we use `BITPACK_MEMBER_DECLTYPE` to use the field's _type_ as its name and construct the appropriate proxy.
`BITPACK_OPERATE_QUALIFY_DEPENDENT`, analogously, uses `BITPACK_MEMBER_DEPENDENT` internally.
In much more detail, `BITPACK_OPERATE_QUALIFY_DECLTYPE(c, Reference, =, ExternalA)`
can be thought of as expanding to
```c++
BITPACK_OPERATE_DECLTYPE(c.template member<TyDevice::Reference>(), =, ExternalA)
```
which then expands to
```c++
c.template member<TyDevice::Reference>() =
  decltype(c.template member<TyDevice::Reference>)::Field::Type::ExternalA
```
which is to say
```c++
c.template member<TyDevice::Reference>() = TyDevice::Reference::ExternalA
```
(Internally, the difference between explicitly named members and type-named members
amounts to the former invoking `.member<FieldType, FieldInfo>()` while the latter invokes `.member<FieldType>()`.
This second form uses some type-level computation machinery
buried inside the `BITPACK_USUAL_PREFIX` and `BITPACK_MEMBER_ADD_*` macros
to map from a `FieldType` to its `FieldInfo`.)

We could also have written, instead of `BITPACK_MEMBER_DEPENDENT(c, Bias) = 0x7f`,
`BITPACK_OPERATE_WRAP_DEPENDENT(c, Bias, =, 0x7f)`.
The former makes use of `Numeric<T>`'s implicit conversion from `T`, while the latter is more general.
The `BITPACK_OPERATE_WRAP_...` macros are similar to the `BITPACK_OPERATE_QUALIFY_...`
except that they expand to invoke the indicated type's constructor, rather than simply qualify the value.
That is, `BITPACK_OPERATE_WRAP(proxy, op, value)` expands to `(proxy) op (F{value})`,
invoking the `F` constructor,
where `F` is the type of the field being proxied by `proxy` (specifically, `decltype(proxy)::Field::Type`).

# Conclusion

This has been a whirlwind tour of the "bitpack" machinery available in the CHERIoT-RTOS programming environment.
Bitpacks are meant to increase legibility, portability, and type-safety of low-level code that manipulates sub-fields of numeric words.
We hope that you find they have achieved their purpose!
